all right here we go mr. Dawkins thank
you very much for being here I really
appreciate it thank you I'm a huge fan
of your work and we have a new book out
outgrowing God when does it come out is
it out now it is out now it is nothing
like this week right last week I think I
read The God Delusion in in preparation
for this do you pull that microphone
right up to your face just get it about
a fist away from your face you have to
move okay
the microphone move for you I'm a huge
fan of your work
and I always wanted to ask you it you
you go so hard against religion and you
have for so long has there ever been a
time where you've gotten fatigued from
this where you like I just leave this to
somebody else well obviously not because
I just it's not so hard as you think I
mean you remember it as hard but
actually if you read it again I think
you'd find it was not as hard as you
remember I didn't mean hard in in a
negative sense I mean you push you're
okay you're so enthusiastic about you're
an enthusiastic yes I'm also humorous I
mean I like to think it's a funny book
but a lot of people do think it's hard
in the other sense and and sometimes
when they read it again they realize
actually no it's more humorous it's not
so not so edgy not so hard-hitting as as
they think it was they originally
thought it was well I think that's
probably because you've had some
interviews in the past we have talked to
some fiercely religious people and
you've had some cantankerous
interactions with them I think maybe so
they they associate you with having this
almost aggressively atheistic stance yes
well he perhaps you're thinking ability
well I mean he's aggressive all right
yeah in the other way I did once had to
tell him will you please stop
interrupting me and let me talk and and
so that might give this slight
impression that I'm addressing you know
was that BBC documentary that you you
had done or you'd you have done several
the one where you had gone and
interviewed a bunch of different
religious people yes that was not BBC
that was Channel four which is the
commercial station and yes I interviewed
Ted Haggard yes and a guy who ran a
thing called hell not hell holes hell
hell hell houses where they write yeah
try
to terrify children mm I mean freak them
out with horrible little plays little
playlists yeah the devil coming on with
horns and living eyes and I actually
participated in a reenactment of that
play in Los Angeles back in the day a
comedy reenactment Bill Maher was in it
a bunch of other comedians were in it
and we read word for word the the script
and we acted it out in front of a live
audience so people would come through
the Hell House yes this haunted house
but instead it was people knew it was
all comedians reading and they like is
this really the words that they said it
was so preposterous that it actually
without being a parody it actually
played out like a comment well when we
filmed it we filmed them doing the play
and then we filmed me interviewing the
perpetrator Michael somebody or other
yeah and I said to him what's your
target audience and he said 12 and I
said really are you are you really
serious that you liked
he said hell is at a terrible place that
anything I can do to persuade children
not to sin and they must acknowledge in
knowledge Jesus and so on is it's worth
it I thought that was a deeply immoral
thing to say but I think he was sincere
yeah why I would agree with you is it's
it's very disturbing that that was a
there's a great documentary on it as
well for someone who wants to see like
the thought process behind them creating
this but one of the things that I really
enjoyed about The God Delusion is that
you you kind of outlined every single
possible argument against atheism and
then how to counter to it in advance
like if you you know you you have a soft
position look at chapter 1 if you look
at this look at chapter 2 and you you
outline that in the preface before you
got into it yes well I tried to be as
persuasive as possible the new book
outgoing God is sort of aimed at a
younger audience and I like to think
that can be read at any age but being
able to a younger audience is a bit
shorter and perhaps some a bit easier to
follow I'm not sure why is it do you
think that there are so many
religions and that basically every
single civilization throughout human
history has had some sort of deity some
sort of higher power it's amazing the
way they split and divergent divergent
divergence as though they somehow can't
get along with each other and maybe new
leaders arise who have a leadership
complex or something and want to found
their own sector time and time again you
have breakaway religions breakaway
faiths I don't know what the
psychological reason for it is but they
what I have noticed is that they usually
hate the religion which is the closest
to their own more than they do more
distant ones and that is a biological
ring to it too
that kind of makes sense to it to a
biologist taking it diverging species
well it almost seems like if you were
studying human beings if you were
something that was completely alien to
our civilization our culture and you
were looking at this the strange
tendency to believe in something that
there's no proof of and devote a massive
amount of energy into defending that put
it into your songs and put it into you
know your pledge of allegiance and all
these did which of course was not until
the 1950s but all the different things
that people have done in so many
different cultures with in regards to
religion it almost seems like a natural
aspect of being a human being you're
right that they put an enormous amount
of energy and effort and expense and
time and and cost in sharing some of the
extreme sex which whip themselves with
horrible weapons and scar their own
backs it's a it's very very surprising
to a biologist who do you think we would
think that they would movie more
interested in surviving and reproducing
but know there's something about
religion that makes them go to extremes
of costliness and I don't get it I must
say do you I've thought about this so
many times
do you think that it is in some way a
counter to the sort of existential angst
that comes from being a finite life-form
being a finite a thinking conscious
finite life form that's aware of its own
demise where it's coming so it has to
formulate some purpose and some meaning
and and a hope of an afterlife is yes
yes and is the purpose and meaning right
yeah yes I suppose that's right yes I
think that's that's right I can
understand why people might want to
believe a priest who comes along and
tells them you don't have to worry about
death because you're going to survive it
I'm less understanding of people who
make up stories to comfort either
themselves or other people I mean a made
up story should not be comforting I
didn't understand how a made up story
can be comforting of course if you make
it up and persuade somebody else then
they could find it comforting on the
other hand is an afterlife really all
that comforting when you think about
half of them believe they're going to go
to hell so is anything but comforting
and also even if you're not going to
hell if you're going to heaven eternity
in heaven I mean sitting up sitting in
in heaven for not just billions of years
but trillions of years I mean these are
these are time spans beyond our
comprehension how unbelievably boring it
would be what it though I mean I don't
know I I enjoy life but if I had to live
my life over and over again infinitely
if I had an infinite number of this
exact lives I don't know how I would
approach that in the moment I can enjoy
it I could do it maybe 200 years but
after that now I mean I think I think
that eternity is what's frightening
about death and eternity is best spent
under a local under a general anesthetic
hmm is what's gonna happen right gonzo
alcohol the lights maybe yeah or maybe
not
have you had any experience with
psychedelics yeah no give any interest
in that I've been offered to be
accompanied on a trip by a very nice
woman friend yeah and I've never so far
dared take her up on it how go I asked
advice of a cousin of my father who's
just recently died who was a major
expert on psychedelics and I think he
was the one who introduced Aldous Huxley
to mescaline for example and he
judiciously advised against he said that
the horrors of a bad trip are so awful
that he wouldn't he wouldn't advise
somebody to go into it
my friend who's offering me this this
trip says it would be a relatively low
dose and she would take another low dose
so she could kind of accompany me you
know I don't leave jumping out of window
or anything well there's so many stories
in so many ancient religions it seemed
to originate with the consumption of
some sort of a psychedelic yes and you
know there's many including John Marco
Oleg grows the sacred mushroom Jesus
Jesus was a much yes yes so I mean I
mean you could see the connection if you
were a primitive person with no access
to science and you found some mushroom
growing under a tree and consumed didn't
have this unbelievable experience you
would assume that you've transcended
this life and gone into this other realm
where God exists I once thought that I
would try a psychedelic when I was on my
deathbed that's it but what if it was
amazing
you know like I could have gotten so
much done was this okay if I had tried
this out when I was 30 yes maybe right
I I don't you know I don't think anybody
should do anything I mean I used to I
used to encourage people to do things
all the time
now my thought is do whatever compels
you whenever you feel like it but I
would think that a person like yourself
who has this sort of rigorous belief
that the lights go out and then that's
it I would think that that would be
attractive to just at least dip your
toes in yes yes well don't you think the
lights go out I don't know you know I
don't know I've had some pretty profound
psychedelic experiences that make me
wonder what what thoughts are and what
what consciousness is and whether or not
there's some way that it transcends when
I wonder what consciousness is but it's
pretty clear that it's to do with brains
and brains decay and so I I wouldn't
hold out much hope that were you well
you might be right yeah you might be and
well certainly consciousness does have
to do with brains
no brain damage severely perturbed
consciousness but there's some
interaction with certain chemicals and
that makes this experience far different
than what it is when we're on the natch
little brains there mm-hmm
yeah still brain but that's it
reductionist I think wrong with
reductionism nothing wrong with it
you're not saying there is do you what
is the the fiercest opposition that
you've ever had to to your work fiesta
stole most cogent well let's try both
fiercest meaning the most the who has
become the most angry at your work and
most Ted Haggard maybe that guy really
yeah well he's such a preposterous
person for folks who don't know he was a
guy who he was he was pretty anti-gay
right and turned out he was smoking meth
and having sex with gay prostitutes and
you know the whole deal and
which is whenever someone to me is
ridiculously anti-gay I always assumed
that they're gay I always assumed well
this guy's he's just trying to like
divert divert attention yes well he was
very hostile and in a very weird way so
it's all on television it's that was
before his scandal oh yes you got a hold
of him before the scandal oh yeah yeah
yeah he was he was very hostile with you
I remember that he was aggressive like
angry he almost tried to run us over in
the in the car park after afterwards I
think he didn't know who I was when he
interviewed me and then I think he went
away afterwards and googled me was there
Google back that I don't think there was
I think that's Gator yeah that's so he
was the the the fiercest in terms of his
reaction he had a very nasty smiley face
and and he looked at the fiercest yes
yeah what does anybody had a good debate
with you about it where they had some
good points not good points no I mean
I've had very amicable debates with
religious people bishops Archbishop's
and people like that rabbi chief
Chief Rabbi of Britain very amicable and
the former Archbishop of Canterbury
Rowan Williams is such a nice man and
intelligent in the literal sense that he
finishes your sentences for you and so
it clearly understands exactly what
we're trying to say it gets there before
you finish the sentence but then for
some weird reason doesn't agree with it
[Laughter]
yeah that is that is the conundrum super
intelligent people who are deeply
religious and who believe everything
everything from the resurrection to the
Virgin Mary to everything I assume that
he would believe possibly in the
resurrection because they regard that as
a kind of non-negotiable part what
surprised me was that he turned out to
believe in all the other miracles as
well which I thought sophisticated
theologians just don't do I thought they
said oh that's just a metaphor or didn't
really happen all that's not important
just symbolic or something like that but
he really believed believes in that a
lot what was his interpretation of
things like death by adult for adultery
and things along those he didn't ask him
about that I saw I simply don't know
well what's fascinating to me is not
just the old religions but really the
young religions the young religions too
as I've gotten older are more
interesting things like Mormonism and
more particularly Scientology which is
even more preposterous probably the most
preposterous one that we have though
those are really interesting to me they
are interesting but because they're so
young that you can see how they grow out
people couldn't see actual process
Mormonism I'm depressed by how
successful it is actually Scientology as
well but Mormonism since when we know
Joseph Smith was a charlatan everything
about him screams charlatan and yet
plenty of respectable people including
presidential candidates men in suits
appear to believe it in the case of I
mean I discuss it in
outgrowing God in addition to the Book
of Mormon Joseph Smith purported to
translate another book called The Book
of Abraham which was in a different
language some ancient Egyptian language
and he published his full translation of
the Book of Abraham which was he said
was all about Abraham's journeys in
Egypt and lots of detail about Egypt and
Abraham in Egypt and things
the original manuscript was were
destroyed in a fire in Chicago and so he
was safe from anybody exposing his
translation but it was discovered that
he some of these manuscripts the device
had survived and they had not been
destroyed and modern scholars who
actually knew the language including
some Mormon scholars translated it again
a true translation had nothing whatever
to do with Abraham or Egypt this is
absolute cast on demonstration that
Joseph Smith was a complete fake and
charlatan this is fully documented and
yet they go on believing that he was a
prophet when he was 14 - when he came up
with it which is even more bizarre see
ya 1820 he's 14 years old I didn't know
that there was a little kid yeah just a
boy with a fantastic imagination and it
sort of caught fire yes the golden
plates which disappeared yeah and the
seer stone into a hat it's just so
strange to me that it persists but the
people that practice the religion are so
nice
they're some of the nicest cult members
I've ever met in my life yes I suppose
so Mormons of my faith they're my
favorite yeah absolutely my favorite
even when they come on your doorstep and
sort of they haven't if they did maybe I
changed my mighty right over there Jamie
good okay I'm also very interested in
the perhaps even a even more recent
things like the cargo cults hmm the
Pacific where again these these actually
arose in living memory and I was of the
worship of Jordan from
in some of the islands in the Pacific
where you couldn't see what happened
mm-hmm and this gives you an insight
into what must have happened with Jesus
where you know that the Gospels weren't
written down until decades after Jesus's
death if he ever liveth which he
probably did and so having seen how
easily the cargo cults arose people who
worship John from worship Prince Philip
believed that cargo planes were sent by
the ancestors and would build dummy
airfields with dummy control towers and
radar dishes and dummy planes on the
airfield and things this is all within
living memory and something like that it
just so transparent that something like
that went on in the early church well
the Scientology story to me is the most
bizarre because it was literate I mean
if you wanted to have a crazy religion
like what would be the most ridiculous
religion for people to believe in well
and he even announced he was going to do
it yes I still believe it but if you're
gonna have the most ridiculous religion
we would say well get a fiction author
particularly a bad one a bad
science-fiction author who walked around
in a jacket with metal zombies he gave
himself and have that guy create a
religion a guy who is really self
diagnosing his own psychological issues
and trying to deal with him through this
concept of Dianetics yeah I'm sure you
read Lawrence Wright's book go ahead and
read it but I mean I know the story the
book is fantastic yes it's just so crazy
it's so and it's so strange that to this
day people are clinging to it and it
makes you wonder like what is it about
these systems of belief that are so
intrinsically attractive to people so
uniquely a part of being a person these
these belief systems I think I get it
when there's childhood indoctrination
involved but in the case of Scientology
some of the celebrities who joined it
that's not childhood in don't know and
that's just sheer rank stupidity I think
there's also an element of being a part
of a tribe yes that especially the
celebrity thing because I've met quite a
few of them out here especially in the
early days the 90s
before the internet came along and sort
of exposed a lot of this stuff and South
Park before they came along and exposed
it there was quite a few people that
thought there was a career advantage to
being a part of Scientology there were
so many successful actors they were a
part of Scientology and they were they
seemed to be disciplined and focused and
they they were avoiding drugs and all
the pitfalls of Hollywood fame and
stardom and they also seemed to be
helping each other that Hollywood
directors who were also Scientologists
would look towards hiring Scientologists
producers and actors they're kind of
freemasonry then yes yes there's some
strange thing that we are all very
attractive attracted to being a part of
a tribe and being a part of even if the
belief system is ridiculous if we are in
a group that subscribes this belief
system it's very attractive to people
it's a very important point and
tribalism is a very important part of
human human nature a very eat of a bad
part I think yeah and the rewarding part
is well I suppose so
Steven Pinker you probably had him at
some point he makes the point that so
much of what we believe we humans
generally believe is not about evidence
but is about is this part of my tribe
right what does my tribe believe this
yes and Jonathan hi it also makes the
same point about Republicans and
Democrats yes there's that there's a
fierce tribalism going on and it's it
accounts for so much of what people
believe as opposed to actually looking
at the evidence the Center for inquiry
which my foundation has just merged with
is of course all about trying to get
people off that sort of thing that of
irrationality and to instead evaluate
claims on the basis of evidence
critically evaluated scientific evidence
but it's hard because people have other
motives like emotion tribalism things
like that
well people find great comfort in these
belief systems it gives them sort of
I've often said that it gives them some
sort of like a scaffolding for their
just their structure of the world their
ethics their morals they can use
religion as some sort of a mechanism to
help them get by something that they can
climb on to ease some of the confusion
of the unknown I'm sure that's true but
I don't understand why anybody
therefore thinks that therefore the
religion is true why would you think
because it provides you with a scaffold
you can climb on that makes it true I
could understand you erecting a scaffold
that will say gymnastics or a certain
diet or something like that but a belief
about the universe that's how I that got
to be true or not and it doesn't make it
true just because it's comforting or
provides you with a scaffold to climb on
well it's almost like it's a spiritual
system like a placebo effect like a
spiritual placebo effect and by
believing that this is true it gives you
this comfort and allows you to condense
your thoughts into a better path the
placebo effect of course is very real
and yes and doctors know about it but
did you know that the perceiver effect
works even if the patient is told it's a
placebo yes that I don't get I mean that
incredible yeah it's very strange
well it's sometimes people doing things
and knowing that they're doing things
gives them this sort of feeling of
momentum of accomplishment of progress
and I think so many people are just so
adrift and don't have focus that even
just telling them hey we're gonna you're
gonna be a part of this program yes
program to treat X Y disease whatever it
is and here's this thing like just just
focusing on it I think the main reason
why so many people believe in homeopathy
which which not only doesn't work but
cannot work is the placebo effect then
they say well it's part of their gonna
get better anyway of course but it's
also the placebo effect that the
homeopathic I would say doctor
homeopathic practitioners yeah gives
them nonsensical piece of medicine and
they believe it's were going to work and
so it does and and so the placebo effect
is important
the CFI central inquiry has actually got
a lawsuit going on at the moment against
pharmaceutical shops selling homeopathic
remedies alongside genuine ones hmm we
can't stop them actually selling
homeopathic remedies what we can try and
do is stop them putting them on the same
shelf as though there's no difference
but between them but my colleague Nick
Humphrey who's a psychologist very
insightful one things you could actually
even justify homeopathy on the grounds
that homeopathic practitioners are
allowed to prescribe placebos they call
them homeopathic where they are placebos
whereas real doctors are not allowed to
prescribe they used to real doctors used
to try placebos all the time but they're
now no longer allowed to because it
violates human rights but homeopaths are
allowed to a bizarrely because they
don't call them placebos if they did
they wouldn't be allowed to well I have
a similar thought about chiropractic
work chiropractors you know do relieve
pain from some for some people but
there's no reason why it works
I would not be totally surprised if it
worked I don't haven't looked into it
enough I would absolutely be surprised
if homeopathy works it cannot work
because there's no active ingredient I
can't well wait to tell you the story of
chiropractic medicine that it was
created by a guy who is a magnetic
healer it was murdered by his own son
and his son took over the business and
started saying that it can cure
everything from leukemia to heart
disease everything all by manipulating
the spine yes it was done in the 1800s
and there's no science behind it at all
but yet so many people have found pain
relief and chiropractors today it's
weird to lump them all in together but
many chiropractors today do do good work
because they incorporate legitimate
modalities in terms of like
rehabilitation like cold laser and all
these different massage remedies and all
these different things that actually
physically work I know a woman who is
that horse chiropractor she does know
Christ but what I'm trying to make is
that whereas it's a it's an empirical
question whether it whether chiropractic
works in the case of homeopathy it
cannot work because the dilution is such
that the there was nothing there
visiting there right there's no chemical
region one of these they will they say
it can work because water has a memory
but if they could prove that water has a
memory they'd get the Nobel Prize for
Physics and they're not going to one of
the things that I really enjoyed about
your book was when you explain to people
that everyone who practices a religion
is an atheist
you're just an atheist in regards to
Zeus or Hollow 999 other gods yes and
that that's a home run
yeah this Ark yes because just go one
God further yes yeah but that it really
is a home run because this is this
concept of you know I me and my friends
jokingly what would always say praise
Odin when anything would happen it was
that pretty good cool yes we say praise
Odin and I started doing it online and
people really got into saying praise
Odin about certain things or other like
that yes some people get mad at me
they actually got mad that it was you're
mocking Christianity by saying pretty
you are
why not really I was just having fun yes
I was having fun because I owed encima
we're cool God you know it's a
old-school God you know I mean it's the
god of the Vikings
Douglas Adams wrote a lovely book called
the long dark teatime of the soul which
had in which the Norse gods apart a
vision Odin in that in that book has got
old and senile and he's just lies in bed
all the time and asking for clean sheets
every day and Thor is out there doing
mischief with his great hammer and at
one point
Odin sees gets Thor super glued to the
floor and think there's a wonderful
story the vast number of different
religions the I mean the incredible
number I mean how many how many actual
religions are there thousands thousands
yes I'd say I forget how many thousands
and many of them share similar belief
systems and it's really interesting when
you see how they're put like you know
the Noah's Ark story is very similar to
the epic of gilgamesh and there's so
many that you see like oh they probably
told
this to someone else and these people
moved in coast has traveled on and it's
it's just amazing that that concept is
alien to people when I was a boy I was
raised Catholic and I had an aunt who
was Jewish and my uncle married my aunt
and he had to convert to Judaism and it
was like a big deal in the family
everybody would talk about it and it's
there was no anger everybody loved my
aunt she's great lady but it was just
strange that he was converting to the
sides of other religion I remember I was
five years old when this was going on
and I was like wait wait wait what do
you mean another religion yes like
what's going on yes and they're like oh
she's Jewish I go what what does that
mean
what do you mean she's Jewish yes and
they had explained it to me yeah okay
but she believes in God like yeah that
they believe in God okay so why is it a
different thing well they believe Jesus
was a different kind of a thing it was
they don't they don't necessarily
believe use the God that we think he was
but if it's been Hindu they'd have had
to explain to they believe in hundreds
of gods Vishnu and yes yes yeah and then
we'd have to go way back yeah it's just
when you first hear that I mean that was
put probably put the first seeds of
doubt in my head when I was a young boy
when I was like with this more than one
like I'll never forget that moment cuz
we're all sitting around the dinner
table and I was just a little kid and
everything what do you mean there's
another one I think that's a very
powerful way of getting to children is
to just simply tell them that yes
telling him nothing but facts you're not
indoctrinated right he was telling them
there are lots of different religions
and Hindus believe in hundreds of gods
and Jews but even one God and Muslims
believe in one God and they don't
believe in Jesus and and just lay out
all the different religions that would
be a very good educational exercise has
there ever been a civilization that
existed without a belief in a higher
power I don't think there has no of
course there are plenty of individuals
who educate that don't believe in a
higher power but I think probably true
to say that ever every I mean
anthropologist might couldn't might deny
them and there might be some tribe that
doesn't but I suspect they all do well
there's been some
tribes that worshipped animals and
particularly oh yeah although they
survived off of yes yeah and and and and
river gods and thunder gods and and moon
gods and Sun gods and forgot some things
yes when you look at human civilization
and you go back to the origins of
religion and you look towards the future
do you envision a time where humanity is
free of what you would consider
irrational belief systems or belief
systems are not based on fact I do
I'm not sure it'll come soon but I do
and I look forward to that time of
course I think we're moving in the right
direction and the figures bear that out
in even in America which is office of
the scale of Western civilization's even
in America the number of people who now
subscribe to a religion is is is
dropping dramatically and the number who
say they have no religion is now about
25 percent that's a lot there is a deal
and that compares to any one particular
Christian denomination and yet
politically that group the the nuns the
note the no beliefs have no lobby they
have no no powerful pressure group so
politicians will go out there and suck
up to I don't know the Irish lobby the
Polish lot lobby the Jewish lobby the
Catholic Lobby etc but the atheist lobby
hasn't got his act together or isn't
only just now beginning to get his act
together well politically I think people
are terrified of the concept because
it's such a such a long branch to go out
on one of the things you brought up in
The God Delusion was the willingness of
people to vote for a gay candidate for
president a black candidate for
president a woman candidate for
president but then an atheist which is I
believe 40% they think they think that
you've got to have a belief in some kind
of higher power in order to be moral but
the weird thing is that it doesn't have
to be the same higher power as the one
you believe it anyone will do right as
long as it as long as there is one but
if you don't believe in a higher power
you must be
immoral you and that of is totally
ridiculous how do you think about the
horrible immorality of for example the
both the Bible and the Quran which of
which are horrific in the sense that if
you build if you actually got your
morals if you got your moral values from
the Old Testament or the Quran and they
they share that great deal of course you
would be stoning adulterers to death and
sterling people to death for breaking
the Sabbath and doing he sacrifices
human sacrifices and animal sacrifices
all sorts of horrible things which of
course do go on now in Islamic countries
especially gay people getting thrown off
high buildings and women being beheaded
for the crime of being seen with a man
not their husband and that kind of thing
so that that we could see what you get
when you get your morality from an
Abrahamic scripture and yet there are
still people in this country who say you
cannot be moral unless you believe in a
higher power what do you think let's
extract these this concept of a higher
power let's let's get rid of it let's
let's get rid of where where do you
think people get their morals and their
ethics from and that's a profoundly
difficult question we clearly don't get
them from religion and yet we get them
from somewhere and you can demonstrate
that by the fact that the moral values
of any particular century are markedly
different from those of other centuries
even decades so in the 21st century we
here now have moral values which are
really significantly different from a
hundred years ago or 200 years ago or
300 years ago and within any one of
those centuries you could take people
who are in the vanguard of moral
progress for example in the 19th century
Abraham Lincoln Charles Darwin th Huxley
would have been on the liberal
progressive end
of the spectrum and other people to be
on the opposite end but even Abraham
Lincoln for example made a speech were
quoted in outgrowing God in which he
said of course no nobody would seriously
think that black people are the equal of
white people
nobody would seriously say that black
people should be allowed to vote or
should be allowed to marry white people
this is Abraham Lincoln who freed the
slaves right and was as I say in the
forefront of progressive thought Charles
Darwin again was in favor of freeing the
slaves he was passionately anti-slavery
but he too thought that there was no
question about black people being the
equal of white people they obviously
weren't and and and and Huxley Thomas
Huxley again Darwin's Bulldog thought
the same way now those people were at
the forefront as I say today they would
still be in the forefront and they would
be horrified to look back on what they
said mmm
in the 19th century well something is
changing as the centuries go by I in
outgrowing God I call it something in
the air which of course doesn't explain
anything but what I mean by that is that
it's not literally hovering in the air
but it's a chemical it's a current
collection of all conversations between
people dinner party conversations
parliamentary decisions congressional
debates judicial decisions by judges
juries newspaper articles journalism all
these things together conspire together
to produce something in the air
something that that defines a given
century or maybe even a given decade
with the moral values of that of that
decade then the knowledge base which is
just so superior today in in terms of
what the general public has access to in
terms of what we understand about human
beings it's just different than it was
back then and it continues to be
different and now with the internet we
have so much more
access to these conversations and it's
not just about being a dinner table with
the right people you can watch YouTube
videos yourself debating religious
scholars so that so the that progress of
something in the air has allowed as it
were take on an accelerated pace because
of the internet yeah and I think that's
a very hopeful sign of course the
internet also can be used for the
opposite purpose but there I think
there's a kind of asymmetry there
because especially if you look at the
United areas of the world like
Afghanistan and Pakistan where until
recently the idea of vegan atheist was
simply inconceivable it was off the
radar
they didn't even consider it it wasn't
something that they thought was possible
now they do because they got the
internet and we've got a project within
CFI of downloading free of charge as
pdfs several of my books including The
God Delusion and we'll be outgrowing God
as well and these are being downloaded
by large numbers of people
the first PDF download of the Arabic
edition of The God Delusion was
downloaded 13 million times
Arabic Edition 13 million times so now
they are being exposed to the
possibility of atheism which wasn't a
posit of course there's still me the
Internet is also exposing them to
Islamic propaganda but they've had that
all along from Imams mullahs and and
their madrasah schools but now they've
got it got it coming the other way as
well and I have great hope that the
internet will mark a turning point do
you think that people need a structure
and is it possible to give them a
secular structure that mimics religion
there's certainly some sort of a
community aspect yes possibly I don't
feel that very strongly myself and I
rather than many other people do and
there are people who are interested in
starting up sort of atheistic or secular
meetup groups on Sundays and lectures
yeah my worry is that that will become a
sex call always seems to have someone
who gets in control who winds up as
religious cows yeah
I mean this is rotten restore is that
awful man what he called them
who ended up taking his followers to a
South American jungle and Jim Jones Jim
Jones Arya and I mean he had this
gigantic harem of all the young women it
always do yes Waco one that they all do
yes yeah well okay I mean I don't think
that's happening so far with the secular
oh not once the worry is that once
someone gets into position of being the
person who gets to speak the Alpha the
the one who's on the you know on the
stage addressing people and giving them
the doctrine that he becomes far too
attractive for his own good
well that that would not surprise any
naive Darwinian who would say what
another do you think do you become and
the the dominant chimpanzee becomes
dominant for right that's what it's all
about
exactly there's got to be a way to avoid
that though I mean maybe maybe the the
exposing nature of the internet would be
the the thing that the the actual yes
the thing that mitigate is I'm not
personally that interested in meetup
groups and communities are centers and
things that other people are I mean I
like it really care about is scientific
truth and and that's what I'm trying to
propagate that's very admirable but I
think for some people it represents our
bonding of the community you know you
could have concerts and lectures and
book clubs I think when they get
together and they talk about all the
values that Jesus proposed if Jesus is
the higher power it gives them this sort
of again moral scaffolding yes yes well
Jesus would probably on the hill provide
a fairly good moral scaffolding not
totally but good right he was ahead of
his time anyway do you so you do think
he was a real person
most of the scholars I've talked to say
he probably was the evidence is not
great of course but I think um I don't
think it's that big a deal actually
because he I mean a wandering preacher
called Yeshua Yeshua would it not be
surprising I mean it's a common name and
the
wandering preachers what would be very
surprising would be if he raised Lazarus
from the dead and water and turn water
into wine now that of course didn't did
not happen well why couldn't people just
drink water either why did they have to
drink one he's trying to get people
drunk so that was a separate question i
I mean I think it the point I'm making
is that it's a very big difference as
they did he exists and maybe he did
maybe didn't who cares really
or as that's very different from saying
that a miracle worker right who really
did do miracles rather than conjuring
tricks existed yes what was the you you
said that you wrote this it's a
beginner's guide outgrowing God well
it's for young people I originally
wanted to write a book for the young
children and publishers didn't want to
do that they so they kept pushing the
age range up and so it it stabilized at
about 15 but I think 14 well I what the
first chapter has been read by one
ten-year-old of my to my acquaintances
he loved it and I I think it but really
I'm hoping it'll be read by people of
all ages there's um one thing that does
happen to some people that are
indoctrinated very young that the
experience is so so negative to them
that they rebel and they rebelled and
then they seek out other ways of
thinking and then you find them
eventually abandoning them religion
there's a woman named Megan Phelps do
you know she is I think she's Fred
Phelps from the Sue's his granddaughter
and yes amazing woman yes he wound up
communicating with people through all
things Twitter yes and men her husband
she rebelled against your father
yes yeah she wanted leaving the church
and wind up realizing that she was
trapped in some sort of a Christian cult
and a very hateful one yes there that
God hates fags be exactly on it and the
same was true of Nate Phelps who was
Fred Phelps his son
and he also escaped he escaped on his
18th birthday well and and became an
atheist and and became I think he's
actually spoken at some of our
conferences from time to time yeah
there's there's hope in that yes there
is
it's just when I like when people cans
and she I've had her in the podcast
she's such a unique woman and she's so
kind and she's so thoughtful and
intelligent it's hard to believe that
she's only been out of this cult for a
few years me Twitter have only been
around here why wasn't she really
inviting why wasn't she ruined by and
why she is so intelligent what how did
she exist in that structure while being
so intelligent I agree but of course you
I feel the same way about apparently
intelligent people who believe obvious
nonsense you know and it's it's it's
it's hard to understand it seems to be a
part of what we are though it seems to
be a part of what human beings obviously
exists in so many different
civilizations
yes but decreasing numbers decreasing
numbers of actual individuals right and
in places like Holland and Scandinavia
hardly anybody is religious really what
are the numbers apart from immigrant
Muslims who still are but among them I
don't know that they're pathetically
small is there any evidence that that is
reaching the Muslim world as well and
that people are well as I was saying the
the downloads of of my books have been
encouraging we have this thing called
CFI has a thing called the translation
project which is specifically in order
to do that in order to to take my books
and we hope other people's books as well
and put them into PDFs and then have
them available for free download and I
hear evidence from is Iran from Egypt
from Saudi Arabia from individuals who
say yes there's now quite a substantial
groundswell of anti religious
anti-islamic opinion and I think it's
going to increase and I'm really
encouraged by that one of the things
about
Muslim in my eyes mmm it's very similar
to being Jewish is that Jewish people
it's there are many Jewish people that
are not religious but they are Jewish
like I have a very good friend my friend
Ari he is he is Jewish but he is Nathan
and it's he identifies with being a
Jewish person he is Jewish relatives his
father is a Holocaust survivor but he
looks at it like a thing that he's a
part of like a great long tradition he's
a part of but he doesn't observe no I
understand that I think especially for
people of Jewish heritage who have
relatives killed in the Holocaust I
think it could be a matter of kind of
loyalty to their murdered relatives
mm-hmm I could easily get that and I
think that there are probably cultural
Muslims who probably not for the same
degree of loyalty but police think of
themselves as Muslims I suppose I meant
cultural Anglican in the way I mean I
sort of you know I can sing the hymns
and and I my family observes Christmas
as a result away when someone sneezes do
you say bless you I never did say bless
you actually but right I know I know I
don't say anything but I have no
objection to saying because I don't one
cause that was religious but not
religious but they my college at Oxford
had a fella who was a famous philosopher
a famous atheist a Jair and he when he
was senior fellow he used to say grace
at dinner and when he was asked why he
said I will not utter falsehoods but I
have no objection to uttering
meaningless statements now when you set
out to write this book and write it for
young people how did you structure it in
your mind did you use did you address
did you think of it as addressing young
people with questions that are trying to
talk yes it's in two halves
the first half is debunking God it
begins with what we were talking about
earlier this year number of different
gods and then moves on to the Bible and
how
unreliable a source of information it is
and both the Old Testament and the New
Testament they get a chapter each and
then there's a couple of chapters on
morality and why you don't need or not
only do not need religion to be moral
you better not have religion if you want
to be moral but then the second half of
the book is about science but because I
think that one of the possibly the major
reason people still cling to religion is
a belief that the world is so
complicated especially the living world
is so complicated that it cannot be
explained by purely scientific means and
so I've set out to disabuse them of that
and to show how even the most radically
complicated and beautiful and elegant
pieces of animal design can be and are
explained by science so that's most of
the second half that's a weird one right
the argument that it's too complicated
for it to not be of the divine well it's
I'm not sure as weird it's it's kind of
understandable until you've thought
about it for a bit because complicated
things don't just happen
complicated things like these cameras
and this computer and things like that
they if we all know they had to have an
engineer design them and factories to
build them and they're very very
improbable things statistically
improbable the components of a computer
or a camera if you jumble the up at
random they wouldn't work obviously so
it's kind of pardonable that people
should think there must have been a
designer but then you think of it
further and you realize that the
designer himself would need just the
same kind of explanation and therefore
the designer is not an explanation that
flies and I mean philosophers before
Darwin viola philosophers like Hume
realized that but didn't have anything
to put in its place
Darwin came around gave them that which
you need to put in his place
and when humid have loved Darwin if only
he lived long enough to to meet him to
meet his ideas so I think we have to
have sympathy for people who think that
complexity must mean design but nowadays
we know better and that's what the
second half of outgrowing God is about
who designed the designer that is that
that's the big conundrum for people who
believe in God yes it is and they they
shrug it off they say oh well he didn't
did need a designer he was always there
all but well my favorite one isn't why
did he wait until 6000 I know yes I know
exactly yes that that seems rather
specific is his favorite favorite one we
have in in the Center for inquiry a
program came over from the Richard
Dawkins foundation when we emerged
called ties the teacher Institute for
evolutionary science which is teaching
teachers how to teach evolution because
middle school teachers in this country
apparently are not don't have science
degrees and they don't really know how
to counter how to combat the pushback
that they get from children and parents
and school boards and things
specifically against evolution and so we
we are teaching teachers how to teach
evolution I mean we run workshops do not
run one in every State of the Union and
that I think is one of the that's one of
the projects of CFI which is closest to
my heart so back to this book sorry
folks through a little bit of technical
difficulty what was your motivation for
this you were just trying to figure out
a way to sort of cut off these these
notions at the room yes I mean I'm
worried about childhood indoctrination
and the fact that people who are
religious almost certainly adopt the
religion of their parents and
grandparents and great-grandparents and
so we've got a kind of pseudo genetic
inheritance going on and I I really hate
that I mean that that's wicked that's
that's indoctrination of children so
I've always wanted to try to break that
chain going down the generations
I've always wanted to write a book for
young people and of course it's highly
necessary when you see the enormous and
pernicious influence of fundamentalist
religion especially in this country
actually yes
now the science aspect of it this is I
mean obviously when you talk about the
science of evolutionary biology and
natural selection and random mutations
and all these different things that lead
to a thing becoming a human being over
the course of billions of years it's
such a complex idea for people to grasp
how is it how do you condense it and
sort of simplify the path you introduce
them to the works of these great
scientists that have sort of established
these these ideas for them it's actually
a very simple idea but it plays out in
very complex ways and I think the main
problem from a didactic point of view is
that the results are so complex that
it's hard to believe that anything so
simple as natural selection non-random
selection of randomly varying genes
could really be responsible for
producing something as complicated as a
human body hmm
and so it's a matter of getting around
beating that barrier of incredulity
if the idea was more complex in a way it
might be easier that's the fact that the
idea is so simple I think that may be
why it took so long for a Darwin to come
on the scene when you think about in the
middle of the nineteenth century is
rather late 200 years after Newton did
the face of it much cleverer things and
yet it was another 200 years after
Newton before Darwin came along I think
the reason for that is that the idea is
just too simple it's always ridiculously
simple to be big enough to achieve the
feat of explaining the complexity of any
part of an animal really on but let
alone
animal is there any are there any
examples that you point to in nature or
observable evolution has occurred
because there have been some where we've
seen observable evolution over the
course of you know the last yes I mean
Dawid himself made great play of
domestication which is very fast and
which has occurred in historical time so
we we can see how wolves have been
changed in topeka nieces and poodles and
Labradors and spaniels and and that's a
very very major change to have occurred
in only a couple of thousand a few
thousand years and we see the same with
cabbages and with roses and with horses
and all sorts of other things that's
artificial selection not natural
selection everybody knew about
artificial selection of course farmers
and gardeners pigeon fanciers all knew
about it
Darwin's great insight was to shochet
you don't need a human selector you
don't need a human breeder to do the
transformation from wolf to pub
Pomeranian Nature does it for you
non-random survival is the equivalent of
a human breeder doing the breeding so
that's what what Darwin did and and as
for examples of natural selection we do
have some the famous peppered moths in
Britain is one of them mosquitos I think
is explain in the purple marsupial yes
very peppered moths is the this is a
moth called based on virtual area which
is lizard tree bark
it sits on on tree bugger is perfectly
camouflage it looks like tree bark so
it's it's light coloured and then the
Industrial Revolution in Britain in the
18th and 19th centuries caused the woods
around industrial areas like Manchester
and Birmingham to become blackened and
so the moths stood out they became
conspicuous and they were picked off by
birds but Newton
mouths were black and the mutant black
moths were not picked off by birds and
so what happened was that the percentage
of black moths in the populations around
industrial centers like Birmingham and
Manchester it became much more numerous
and the light colored ones became almost
extinct in those areas with at the same
time the light colored moths in rural
areas
far from industrial pollution like Devon
and Somerset stayed with their their
original original color and this was
worked out beautifully by by a battered
Oxford actually called Burnett
Kettlewell
and and he showed he actually went and
sampled in these different areas and
also did experiments showing birds
actually picking off light colored moths
in dark areas and and vice versa that's
one that we can trace that we can trace
yes because the Industrial Revolution
was only a couple of hundred years ago
so that that's an excellent example for
people to see like this happens look at
this over 500,000 years
look at this over 10,000 years I mean
this is this is what happens this is a
random selection well this one happens
have over only one hundred years or a
hundred years but that this is how a
human being came to be that this same
process yes that's right and and the the
creationist don't like the peppered moth
story they say oh well that's just one
one gene they mean they they try to say
that that same process will not give
rise to major changes like from reptiles
to birds or mammals oh so but it just is
the same process over a much much longer
period and what couldn't be achieved in
a couple of hundred years is more what
can be achieved in a couple of thousand
years is wolf to Pekinese what can be
achieved in a couple of million years is
Australopithecus to homo sapiens what
can be achieved in a hundred million
years is shrew to human
and a thousand million years would be
bacterium to to human well well maybe
not maybe two to two thousand million
years but it's just a it when you're
living in the present and you're
thinking of yourself and you're thinking
of biological life it's it's hard for a
person to see things on those scales
which is one of the reasons why I think
for many people that aren't educated in
these these sort of subjects to to buy
into this concept of some sort of
intelligent design yes
well timescales are well we have no
concept of millions of years we can
really just about cope with when even
thousands of years even going back to
the ancient Egyptians we get a kind of
free song of all I don't you know
wondering what it was like what the Epic
of Gilgamesh what what was it like then
that's nothing compared to eeveelution
your time that's just me
it's not even yesterday it's a couple of
minutes ago it's it's ridiculously short
time well you have a heart out at four
o'clock and that time has come so I want
to thank you for being here and I want
to thank you for your commitment over
the years to educating people and just
you have an amazing amount of endurance
for this stuff and because of that a lot
of people have you know shifted their
ideas and gravitated toward science it's
been a pleasure thank you very much
thank you very much Richard Dawkins
ladies and gentlemen bye-bye good thank
you and I have to sign this
[Music]